.TH "initng" "8" "" "" ""
.SH "NAME"
initng \- a full replacement of the old and in many ways depricated sysvinit
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBinitng\fR
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBInitng\fR is a full replacement of the old and in many ways deprecated sysvinit
tool. It is designed with speed in mind, doing as much as possible
asynchronously. In other words: It will boot your unix\-system much faster, and
give you more control and statistics over your system.

The basic premise is that startup commands can be launched as soon as their
dependencies are met. This limits the effect of bottlenecks like I/O operations;
while one program is performing I/O, another can be utilizing the processor.
Initng tracks the individual service dependencies in its configuration files.

It is designed to use a minimum of system resources and to boot your system
quickly and safely.

\fIlilo\fR users need to add the line '\fIappend="init=/sbin/initng"\fR' in their \fI/etc/lilo.conf\fR,
\fIgrub\fR users can just append '\fIinit=/sbin/initng\fR' to their "kernel image options" line in \fI/boot/grub/menu.lst\fR.
.SH "OPTIONS"
Initng is the first process the kernel starts. It has no parameters.
It will start the services defined in /etc/initng.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ngc(8),
.BR ngdc(8),
.BR ng\-update(8),
.BR gen_system_runlevel(8),
.BR install_service(8),
.BR system_off(8).
.SH "AUTHOR"
initng was written by  Jimmy Wennlund <jimmy.wennlund@gmail.com> and can be found at http://www.initng.org/.
.PP 
This manual page was written by Armin Berres <a.berres@web.de> based on the readme file written by 
Patrick Boehnke.
